Various links to great material that may or may not be used in posts. This is a living file. Please add stuff as you please.

Bitcoin paper
https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

Bitcoin's Academic Pedigree: The concept of cryptocurrencies is built from forgotten ideas in research literature.
Bitcoin wasn't built in a vacuum
https://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=3136559

Weaknesses from bitcoin wiki
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Weaknesses

GMAX on decentralization. Analog English language:
https://www.reddit.com/r/Bitcoin/comments/s82t2n/bitcoin_is_completely_autonomous_right/htdte7w/?context=3

Greg Maxwell on opcodes
https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/106851/what-are-the-downsides-to-enabling-potentially-suboptimal-or-unused-opcodes-in-a/106915#106915
"Every piece of additional consensus logic has implementation and
ongoing maintenance cost which is perpetual and can never be removed
without potentially confiscating some user's assets."

Gmax - Mutliple implementations:
https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=5035144.msg46077622#msg46077622

Greg Maxwell on decentralization
https://www.reddit.com/r/Bitcoin/comments/ddddfl/question_on_the_vulnerability_of_bitcoin/f2g9e7b/
"A far bigger risk to Bitcoin is that the public using it won't
understand, won't care, and won't protect the decentralization
properties that make it valuable over centralized alternatives in the
first place. ... a risk we can see playing out constantly in the
billion dollar market caps of totally centralized systems. The ability
demonstrated by system with fake decentralization to arbitrarily
change the rules out from under users is far more concerning than the
risk that an expensive attack could allow some theft in the case of
over-eagerly finalized transactions."

Arvind Narayanan - Lessons For Bitcoin From 150 Years Of Decentralization
https://btctranscripts.com/mit-bitcoin-expo/mit-bitcoin-expo-2016/lessons-for-bitcoin-from-150-years-of-decentralization/

The Scaling Debate is a Proxy Battle Over Centralization
https://btctranscripts.com/mit-bitcoin-expo/mit-bitcoin-expo-2016/scaling-debate-is-a-proxy-battle-over-centralization/

Andrew Poelstra
On Stake and Consensus
https://nakamotoinstitute.org/static/docs/on-stake-and-consensus.pdf

Andrew Poelstra - security assumptions
https://btctranscripts.com/scalingbitcoin/hong-kong-2015/security-assumptions/

Eric Voskuil, Axiom of Resistance
https://github.com/libbitcoin/libbitcoin-system/wiki/Axiom-of-Resistance
"an assumption that it is possible for a system to resist state control"

Gmax - Scaling roadmap
https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2015-December/011865.html

Pieter - Segregated Witness And Its Impact On Scalability
https://btctranscripts.com/scalingbitcoin/hong-kong-2015/segregated-witness-and-its-impact-on-scalability/

Jonas Nick - Validation Cost Metric
https://btctranscripts.com/scalingbitcoin/hong-kong-2015/validation-cost-metric/

Matt Corallo - Fungibility Overview
https://btctranscripts.com/scalingbitcoin/milan-2016/fungibility-overview/

Adam Back - Scaling Tradeoffs
https://btctranscripts.com/misc/adam3us-bitcoin-scaling-tradeoffs/

Peter Todd - Scaling
https://btctranscripts.com/mit-bitcoin-expo/mit-bitcoin-expo-2015/peter-todd-scalability/
https://btctranscripts.com/scalingbitcoin/hong-kong-2015/in-adversarial-environments-blockchains-dont-scale/

Jimmy Song - Socialized Costs Of Hard Forks
https://btctranscripts.com/breaking-bitcoin/2017/socialized-costs-of-hard-forks/

Andrew Poelstra- Using The Chain For What Chains Are Good For
"There’s a distinction between validation and execution"
https://btctranscripts.com/scalingbitcoin/stanford-2017/using-the-chain-for-what-chains-are-good-for/

Alex B: The Tao Of Bitcoin Development
https://medium.com/@bergealex4/the-tao-of-bitcoin-development-ff093c6155cd

0xB10C: The Incomplete History of Bitcoin Development
https://b10c.me/blog/004-the-incomplete-history-of-bitcoin-development/

Jameson Lopp: Who Controls Bitcoin Core?
https://blog.lopp.net/who-controls-bitcoin-core-/

Jameson Lopp: Nobody Understands Bitcoin (And That’s OK)
https://blog.lopp.net/nobody-understands-bitcoin-and-thats-ok/

Hal Finney: Digital Cach And Privacy (1993!)
https://nakamotoinstitute.org/digital-cash-and-privacy/

David D. Friedman: The Case for Privacy (2005)
https://nakamotoinstitute.org/the-case-for-privacy/
Nice conclusion!

Censorship resistance
=====================

Eric Voskuil, libbitcoin wiki
https://github.com/libbitcoin/libbitcoin-system/wiki/Censorship-Resistance-Property

Layered architecture
====================
Gregory Maxwell on layered systems (and Bitcoin).
https://www.reddit.com/r/Bitcoin/comments/438hx0/a_trip_to_the_moon_requires_a_rocket_with/

Privacy
=======

Adam Back on privacy and fungibility
https://btctranscripts.com/misc/bitcoin-adam3us-fungibility-privacy/
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3dAdI3Gzodo

Chris Belcher - Breaking Bitcoin Privacy
https://btctranscripts.com/breaking-bitcoin/2019/breaking-bitcoin-privacy/

Adam Back - Fungibility And Scalability
https://btctranscripts.com/scalingbitcoin/hong-kong-2015/fungibility-and-scalability/
https://btctranscripts.com/misc/bitcoin-adam3us-fungibility-privacy/

Udi Wertheimer - Privacy Concepts
https://btctranscripts.com/scalingbitcoin/tel-aviv-2019/edgedevplusplus/privacy-concepts/

Sam Wouters - Protect your bitcoin through privacy
https://bitcoinsnippets.com/protect-your-bitcoin-through-privacy/
Easy but long read. With cute cartoons.

Bitcoin Q+A - 10 Tips to Interact with Bitcoin More Privately
https://bitcoiner.guide/privacytips/

Finite supply
=============

Limited money supply [trust, consensus rules]
https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/a/106830/69518
"So the answer is that you don't have to trust someone to not increase the supply. You just have to run some code that will verify that they haven't."

Pieter Wuille counts money
https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/a/38998/69518
"However... However... However..."

Pieter Wuille, BIP42 - A finite monetary supply for Bitcoin
https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0042.mediawiki

G. Maxwell on fee sniping and 
https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/57149/how-do-transaction-fees-exacerbate-instability-in-bitcoin-in-the-future

Resource collections
====================

https://btctranscripts.com/
https://www.lopp.net/bitcoin-information.html
https://bitcoiner.guide/
https://bitcoin-only.com/

