== Privacy

Bitcoin can be described as a pseudonymous system, where users have
multiple pseudonyms in the form of public keys. At first glance, this
looks like a pretty good way to keep users from being identified, but
it is in fact really easy to unintentionally leak private financial
information.

We are going to look at what privacy means in the context of Bitcoin
and why you'd want privacy in the first place. Some well known privacy
attack vectors, both on the blockchain and outside of the blockchain,
are also discussed.

=== What does privacy mean?

Privacy can mean different things in different contexts. In
Bitcoin it generally means that users don't have to reveal their
financial information to others, unless they voluntarily do so.

There are lots of ways in which you may leak your private information
to others, with or without knowing it. Data can leak both from the
public blockchain and through other means, for example by intercepting
your internet communication.

=== Why is privacy important?

It may seem obvious why privacy is important in Bitcoin, but there are
privacy aspects you might not immediately think about. Gregory
Maxwell, on the Bitcoin Talk forum
(https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=334316.msg3588908#msg3588908),
walks us through a lot of good reasons why he thinks privacy
matters. Among them is <<fungibility>>:

[quote, Gregory Maxwell, Bitcoin Talk forum]
____
Financial privacy is an essential element to fungibility in Bitcoin:
if you can meaningfully distinguish one coin from another, then their
fungibility is weak. If our fungibility is too weak in practice, then
we cannot be decentralized: if someone important announces a list of
stolen coins they won't accept coins derived from, you must carefully
check coins you accept against that list and return the ones that
fail.  Everyone gets stuck checking blacklists issued by various
authorities because in that world we'd all not like to get stuck with
bad coins. This adds friction and transactional costs and makes
Bitcoin less valuable as a money.
____

Maxwell also explains how privacy is important for a free market, your
personal safety, and human dignity.

Now that we've got a grip on why privacy matters, let's have a look at
Bitcoin's privacy in practice.

=== Blockchain privacy

Blockchain privacy refers to the information you disclose in
transactions on the blockchain. It can be transactions you make or
transactions other people make to send you money.

Satoshi Nakamoto ponders around on-chain privacy in section 7 of his
https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf[Bitcoin paper]:

[[satoshi-unique-addresses]]
[quote, Satoshi Nakamoto, the Bitcoin paper]
____
As an additional firewall, a new key pair should be used for each
transaction to keep them from being linked to a common owner. Some
linking is still unavoidable with multi-input transactions, which
necessarily reveal that their inputs were owned by the same owner. The
risk is that if the owner of a key is revealed, linking could reveal
other transactions that belonged to the same owner.
____

The paper summarizes the main problems of blockchain privacy: Address
reuse and address clustering. The latter is the ability to decide,
with some level of certainty, that a set of different addresses belong
to the same user.

.Typical privacy leaks on the blockchain.
image::address-reuse-clustering.png[]

Chris Belcher wrote in great detail about the different kinds of
privacy leaks that can happen on the Bitcoin blockchain
(https://en.bitcoin.it/Privacy#Blockchain_attacks_on_privacy). We
recommend you to read at least the first few subsections under
"Blockchain attacks on privacy."

The takeaway is that privacy in Bitcoin isn't perfect. It requires a
significant amount of work to transact privately. Most people aren't
prepared to go that far for privacy. It seems there is a clear
trade-off between privacy and usability.

Another aspect of privacy is that your privacy measures affects other
users as well. If you are sloppy with your privacy, other people might
experience reduced privacy too. Gregory Maxwell explains this in a
simple manner on the same Bitcoin Talk discussion that we linked above
(https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=334316.msg3589252#msg3589252),
and concludes with an example:

[quote, Gregory Maxwell, Bitcoin Talk forum]
____
This actually works in practice, too... A nice whitehat hacker on IRC
was playing around with brainwallet cracking and hit a phrase with
~250 BTC in it.  We were able to identify the owner from just the
address alone, because they'd been paid by a Bitcoin service that
reused addresses and he was able to talk them into giving up the users
contact information. He actually got the user on the phone, they were
shocked and confusedâ€” but grateful to not be out their coin.  A happy
ending there. (This isn't the only example of it, by far ... but its
one of the more fun ones).
____

In this case, all went well thanks to the philanthropically minded
hacker, but don't count on that next time.

=== Non-blockchain privacy

While the blockchain proves to be a notorious source of privacy leaks,
there are plenty of other leaks that don't use the blockchain, some
sneakier than others. These range from key-loggers to network traffic
analysis. To read up on some of these methods, please refer again to
Chris Belcher's piece, specifically the section "Non-blockchain
attacks on privacy"
(https://en.bitcoin.it/Privacy#Non-blockchain_attacks_on_privacy).

Among a plethora of attacks, Belcher mentions the possibility of
someone snooping on your internet connection, for example your ISP:

[quote, Chris Belcher, Bitcoin wiki]
____
If the adversary sees a transaction or block coming out of your node
which did not previously enter, then it can know with near-certainty
that the transaction was made by you or the block was mined by you. As
internet connections are involved, the adversary will be able to link
the IP address with the discovered bitcoin information.
____

Again, protecting against this wide range of attacks is hard and you
probably won't fully be able to, so you have to use some kind of
trade-off between convenience and privacy that works for you.

=== Privacy measures

Several techniques have been developed that helps protect from privacy
leaks. Among the most obvious ones are, as
<<satoshi-unique-addresses,noted by Nakamoto>> above, using unique
addresses for all transactions, but several others exist. We're not
going to teach you how to become a privacy ninja, but Bitcoin Q+A has
a quick summary of privacy enhancing technology, somewhat ordered by
how hard they are to implement, at
https://bitcoiner.guide/privacytips/. You'll notice when you read this
that Bitcoin privacy often has to do with stuff outside of Bitcoin,
for example: don't brag about your bitcoins, and use Tor and VPN. The
post also lists some things directly related to Bitcoin:

Full node:: if you don't use your own full node, you will leak lots of
information about your wallet to servers on the internet. Running a
full node is a great first step.

Lightning Network:: Several protocols exists on top of Bitcoin, for
example the Lightning Network and Blockstream's Liquid sidechain.

CoinJoin:: a way for multiple people to merge their transactions into
one, making it harder to do address clustering.

Note how better privacy can be achieved by building systems on top of
Bitcoin, as is the case with Lightning Network:

.Layers on top of Bitcoin can add privacy.
image::privacy.png[width=50%]

We noted in <<trustlessness>> that trust can only decrease with layers
on top, but that doesn't seem to be the case for privacy, which can be
improved or made worse arbitrarily in layers on top. Why is that?  In
any case, layers on top of Bitcoin must use on-chain transactions now
and then, otherwise they wouldn't be "on top of Bitcoin".

Privacy enhancing layers generally try to use the base layer as little
as possible to leak a minimum amount of information. They don't depend
on the trustlessness of the base layer for their privacy, since all they
reveal to the base layer will be stuff they would reveal anyway.

For more in-depth reading about countermeasures, refer to the
previously mentioned wiki article on privacy, starting at
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Privacy#Methods_for_improving_privacy_.28non-blockchain.29.

=== Conclusion

Privacy is very important but hard to achieve. There is no privacy
silver bullet. To get decent privacy in Bitcoin you have to take
active measures that are costly and time-consuming.
