=== Jameson Lopp - Who controls Bitcoin Core?

****
* Source: https://blog.lopp.net/who-controls-bitcoin-core-/
* Author: Jameson Lopp
* Date copied: 2022-05-25
****

_Understanding how the focal point of Bitcoin development operates._

image:1-sAd4NmyP7LIdipEoRlw5pg.png[image]

The question of who controls the ability to merge code changes into
https://bitcoincore.org[Bitcoin Core]’s
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin[GitHub repository] tends to come up
on a recurring basis. This has been cited as a “central point of
control” of the Bitcoin protocol by various parties over the years, but
I argue that the question itself is a red herring that stems from an
authoritarian perspective — this model does not apply to Bitcoin. It’s
certainly not obvious to a layman as to why that is the case, thus the
goal of this article is to explain how Bitcoin Core operates and, at a
higher level, how the Bitcoin protocol itself evolves.

==== The History of Bitcoin Core

Bitcoin Core is a
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Focal_point_%28game_theory%29[focal point]
for development of the Bitcoin protocol rather than a point of command
and control. If it ceased to exist for any reason, a new focal point
would emerge — the technical communications platform upon which it’s
based (currently the GitHub repository) is a matter of convenience
rather than one of definition / project integrity. In fact, we have
already seen Bitcoin’s focal point for development change platforms and
even names!

* In early 2009 the source code for the Bitcoin project was
http://www.metzdowd.com/pipermail/cryptography/2009-January/014994.html[simply
a .rar file] hosted on SourceForge. Early developers would actually
exchange code patches with Satoshi
https://online.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/finneynakamotoemails.pdf[via
email].
* On October 30 2009, Sirius (https://medium.com/u/2d55f06ada18[Martti
Malmi]) https://sourceforge.net/p/bitcoin/code/1/[created a subversion
repository] for the Bitcoin project on SourceForge
* In 2011, the https://sourceforge.net/p/bitcoin/code/252[Bitcoin
project migrated] from SourceForge to
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/ca40e581ebcdc85dba15c1e873f5e5aedda45b77[GitHub]
* In 2014 the Bitcoin project
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/3408[was renamed to Bitcoin
Core]

==== Trust No One

While there are a handful of GitHub “maintainer” accounts at the
organization level that have the ability to merge code into the master
branch, this is more of a janitorial function than a position of power.
If anyone could merge into master it would very quickly turn into a “too
many cooks in the kitchen” scenario. Bitcoin Core follows principles of
least privilege that any power bestowed to individuals is easily
subverted if it is abused.

____
Core is transparent about the list that matters: the PGP keys who can
sign merge commits. +
 +
The lesson to be learned here is to not trust GitHub! Even Bitcoin Core
doesn't know the full list of people who can change the repo, as that
extends to probably dozens of GitHub employees.

— Peter Todd (@peterktodd)
https://twitter.com/peterktodd/status/1047854713029312512?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[October
4, 2018]
____

From an adversarial perspective, GitHub can not be trusted. Any number
of GitHub employees could use their administrative privileges to inject
code into the repository without consent from the maintainers. But it’s
unlikely that a GitHub attacker would also be able to compromise the PGP
key of a Bitcoin Core maintainer.

Rather than base the integrity of the code off of GitHub accounts,
Bitcoin Core has a continuous integration system that performs checks of
trusted PGP keys that must sign every merge commit. While these keys are
tied to known identities, it’s still not safe to assume that it will
always be the case — a key could be compromised and we wouldn’t know
unless the original key owner notified the other maintainers. As such,
the commit keys do not provide perfect security either, they just make
it more difficult for an attacker to inject arbitrary code.

==== The Keys to the Kingdom

At time of writing,
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/contrib/verify-commits/trusted-keys[these
are the trusted PGP fingerprints]:

____
71A3B16735405025D447E8F274810B012346C9A6 +
133EAC179436F14A5CF1B794860FEB804E669320 +
32EE5C4C3FA15CCADB46ABE529D4BCB6416F53EC +
B8B3F1C0E58C15DB6A81D30C3648A882F4316B9B +
CA03882CB1FC067B5D3ACFE4D300116E1C875A3D
____

These keys are registered to:

____
Wladimir J. van der Laan <laanwj@protonmail.com> +
Pieter Wuille <pieter.wuille@gmail.com> +
Jonas Schnelli <dev@jonasschnelli.ch> +
Marco Falke <marco.falke@tum.de> +
Samuel Dobson <dobsonsa68@gmail.com>
____

Does this mean that we are trusting these five people? Not quite. Keys
are not a proof of identity — these keys could potentially fall into the
hands of other people. What assurances do you really get if you run the
verify-commits python script?

____
python3 contrib/verify-commits/verify-commits.py  +
Using verify-commits data from bitcoin/contrib/verify-commits +
All Tree-SHA512s matched up to
309bf16257b2395ce502017be627186b749ee749 +
There is a valid path from “HEAD” to
82bcf405f6db1d55b684a1f63a4aabad376cdad7 where all commits are signed!
____

The
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/master/contrib/verify-commits[verify-commits]
script is an integrity check that any developer can run on their
machine. When executed, it checks the PGP signature on every single
merge commit since commit 82bcf405… in December 2015 — over 3,400 merges
at time of writing. If the script completes successfully, it tells us
that every line of code that has been changed since that point has
passed through the Bitcoin Core development process and been “signed
off” by someone with a maintainer key. While this is not a bulletproof
guarantee that no one has injected malicious code (a maintainer could go
rogue or have their keys stolen), it reduces the attack surface for
doing so enormously. What are maintainers and how did they attain this
role? We’ll dig into that a bit later.

==== Layered Security

The integrity of Bitcoin Core’s code must not rely solely upon a handful
of cryptographic keys, which is why there are a multitude of other
checks in place. There are many layers of security here to provide
defense in depth:

===== Pull Request Security

. Anyone is free to propose code changes to improve the software by
opening a pull request against the master branch on
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin[bitcoin/bitcoin].
. Developers review pull requests to ensure that they are not harmful.
Anyone is free to review pull requests and provide feedback — there is
no gatekeeper or entrance exam when it comes to contributing to Bitcoin
Core. If a pull request gets to the point that there are no reasonable
objections to it being merged, a maintainer makes the merge.
. Core maintainers set
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/contrib/verify-commits/pre-push-hook.sh[this
pre-push hook] to ensure that they don’t push unsigned commits into the
repository.
. Merge commits are optionally securely timestamped
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ebd786b72a2a15143d7ef4ea2229fef121bd8f12/contrib/devtools/README.md#create-and-verify-timestamps-of-merge-commits[via
OpenTimestamps]
. The https://travis-ci.org/bitcoin/bitcoin[Travis Continuous
Integration system] regularly runs
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/.travis/lint_06_script.sh[this
script] to check the integrity of the git tree (history) and to verify
that all commits in the master branch were signed with one of the
trusted PGP keys.
. Anyone who wants to can run
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/contrib/verify-commits/verify-commits.py[this
script] to verify the PGP signatures on all of the merge commits going
back to December 2015. I ran it while writing this article and it took
25 minutes to complete on my laptop.

===== Release Security

. https://gitian.org/[Gitian] deterministic build systems are run
independently by multiple developers with the goal of creating identical
binaries. If someone manages to create a build that doesn’t match the
builds of other developers, it’s a sign that non-determinism was
introduced and thus the final release isn’t going to happen. If there is
non-determinism, developers track down what went wrong, fix it, then
build another release candidate. Once a deterministic build has
succeeded then the developers sign the resulting binaries, guaranteeing
that the binaries and tool chain were not tampered with and that the
same source was used. This method removes the build and distribution
process as a single point of failure. Anyone with the technical skills
can run their own build system; the
https://github.com/bitcoin-core/docs/blob/master/gitian-building.md[instructions
are here].
. Once the Gitian builds have completed successfully and been signed off
by the builders, a Bitcoin Core maintainer will PGP sign a message with
the SHA256 hashes of each build. If you decide to run a prebuilt binary,
you can check its hash after downloading and then verify the
authenticity of the signed release message with the hashes. Instructions
for doing so https://bitcoincore.org/en/download/[can be found here].
. All of the above is open source and auditable by anyone with the
skills and desire to do so.
. Finally, even after going through all of the above quality and
integrity checks, code that is committed into Bitcoin Core and
eventually rolled into a release is not deployed out onto the network of
nodes by any centralized organization. Rather, each node operator must
make a conscious decision to update the code they run. *Bitcoin Core
deliberately does not include an auto-update feature, since it could
potentially be used to make users run code that they didn’t explicitly
choose*.

Despite all of the technical security measures that are implemented by
the Bitcoin Core project, none of them are perfect and any of them can
theoretically be compromised. The last line of defense for the integrity
of Bitcoin Core’s code is the same as any other open source
project —_ constant vigilance_. The more eyes that are reviewing Bitcoin
Core’s code, the less likely that malicious or flawed code will make it
into a release.

==== Code Coverage

Bitcoin Core has a lot of testing code. There is an integration test
suite that runs against every PR and an extended test suite that runs
every night on master.

You can check the code coverage of the tests yourself by:

. Cloning the Bitcoin Core GitHub repository
. Installing the
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/master/doc#building[required
dependencies] for building from source
. Running
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/developer-notes.md#compiling-for-test-coverage[these
commands]
. Viewing the report at ./total_coverage/index.html

Alternatively, you can view the coverage report Marco Falke
https://drahtbot.github.io/reports/coverage/bitcoin/bitcoin/master/total.coverage/index.html[hosts
here].

.Code Coverage Report
image:1-Vp2ozZbATWF51oe3AbYTzQ.png[Code
Coverage Report]

Having such a high level of test coverage means that there is a higher
level of certainty that the code functions as intended.

Testing is a big deal when it comes to consensus critical software. For
particularly complex changes, developers sometimes perform painstaking
mutation testing — that is, they test the tests by purposely breaking
the code and seeing if the tests fail as expected. Greg Maxwell gave
some insight into this process when he discussed the 0.15 release:

____
“The test is the test of the software, but what’s the test of the test?
The software. To test the test, you must break the
software.” — Greg Maxwell
____

Video: https://youtu.be/nSRoEeqYtJA

==== Free Market Competition

BitMEX https://blog.bitmex.com/bitcoin-cores-competition/[wrote a great
article] about the ecosystem of Bitcoin implementations. There are over
a dozen different Bitcoin compatible implementations, and even more
“competing network” implementations. This is the freedom of open
source — anyone who is dissatisfied with the efforts of the Bitcoin Core
project is free to start their own project. They can do so from scratch
or they can fork the Core software.

At time of writing, 96% of reachable Bitcoin nodes are running some
version of Bitcoin Core. Why is this the case? How can Bitcoin Core have
near-monopoly status over the network of nodes if the effort required to
switch to another software implementation is minimal? After all, many
other implementations provide RPC APIs that are compatible with, or at
least highly similar to Bitcoin Core.

image:1-sAd4NmyP7LIdipEoRlw5pg.png[image]

I believe that this is a result of Bitcoin Core being a focal point for
development. It has orders of magnitude more developer time and talent
backing it, which means that the code produced by the Bitcoin Core
project tends to be the most performant, robust, and secure. Node
operators don’t want to run the second best software when it comes to
managing money. Also, given that this is consensus software and the
Bitcoin protocol does not — and arguably can not — have a formal
specification because no one has the authority to write one, it’s
somewhat safer to use the focal point implementation because you’re more
likely to be bug-for-bug compatible with most of the rest of the
network. In this sense, the code of the development focal point is the
closest thing to a specification that exists.

==== Who Are the Core Developers?

People who are unfamiliar with the
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md[Bitcoin
Core development process] may look at the project from the outside and
consider Core to be a monolithic entity. This is far from the case!
There are frequent disagreements between Core contributors and even
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pulls?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aclosed+is%3Aunmerged+is%3Apr+author%3Alaanwj[the
most]
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pulls?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aclosed+is%3Aunmerged+is%3Apr+author%3Asipa+[prolific
contributors] have written plenty of code that has never been merged
into the project. If you read the guidelines for contributing you may
note that they are fairly loose — the process could be best described as
“https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7282[rough consensus].”

____
Maintainers will take into consideration if a patch is in line with the
general principles of the project; meets the minimum standards for
inclusion; and will judge the general consensus of contributors.
____

Who are the Bitcoin Core maintainers? They are contributors who have
built up sufficient social capital within the project by making quality
contributions over a period of time. When the existing group of
maintainers believes that it would be prudent to extend the role to a
contributor who has exhibited competence, reliability, and motivation in
a certain area, they can grant commit access to that person’s GitHub
account. The lead maintainer role is for someone who has oversight over
all aspects of the project and is responsible for coordinating releases.
It has been voluntarily passed along over the years:

* Satoshi Nakamoto: 1/3/09 -
https://sourceforge.net/p/bitcoin/mailman/message/27102906/[2/23/11]
* https://medium.com/u/7032003d8001[Gavin Andresen]:
https://sourceforge.net/p/bitcoin/mailman/message/27102906/[2/23/11] -
https://bitcoinfoundation.org/bitcoin-core-maintainer-wladimir-van-der-laan/[4/7/14]
* https://medium.com/u/5a1694f832c6[Wladimir] van der Laan:
https://bitcoinfoundation.org/bitcoin-core-maintainer-wladimir-van-der-laan/[4/7/14] — present

Acting as a Bitcoin Core maintainer is often referred to as janitorial
work because maintainers don’t actually have the power to make decisions
that run contrary to the consensus of contributors or of the users.
However, the role can be quite taxing due to the extra attention from
the ecosystem at large. For example, Gregory Maxwell gave up his
maintainer role in 2017
https://www.reddit.com/r/Bitcoin/comments/3x7mrr/gmaxwell_unullc_no_longer_a_bitcoin_committer_on/cy29vkx/[for
personal reasons], likely due to the public pressure he experienced
during the scaling debate.
https://laanwj.github.io/2016/05/06/hostility-scams-and-moving-forward.html[Wladimir
wrote a thoughtful post] about the stress of being a Core maintainer and
why it was appropriate to remove Gavin’s commit access, which upset a
lot of people.

Similarly, when https://medium.com/u/765aa39f1042[Jeff Garzik] was
removed from the GitHub organization, he and others were upset about it,
but he
https://www.reddit.com/r/Bitcoin/comments/6uec40/jeff_garzik_has_been_removed_from_the_bitcoin/[had
not contributed to Core in two years]. Leaving his GitHub account with
write access to the repository was providing no benefit to the
project — it was only creating a security risk and violated the
principle of least privilege to which Wladimir referred in his post.

Others may look at Core and believe it to be a technocracy or ivory
tower that makes it difficult for new entrants to join. But if you speak
to contributors, you’ll find that’s not the case. While only
https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=1774750.0[a dozen people] have
had commit access over the years, hundreds of developers have made
contributions. I myself have made a few small contributions; while I
don’t consider myself a “Core developer” I _technically_ am one. No one
can stop you from contributing!

____
In 2011, as a high school student who didn't understand what a pointer
was, the
https://twitter.com/bitcoincoreorg?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[@bitcoincoreorg]
developer community (especially people like Greg Maxwell,
https://twitter.com/pwuille?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[@pwuille], etc) worked
with me to make my shitty patches worth merging and made it a great
environment to learn in.

— Matt Corallo (@TheBlueMatt)
https://twitter.com/TheBlueMatt/status/1064292104346771458?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[November
18, 2018]
____

____
In 2016,
https://twitter.com/TheBlueMatt?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[@TheBlueMatt]
organised a residency at
https://twitter.com/ChaincodeLabs?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[@ChaincodeLabs].
I'd been reading everything about Bitcoin I could lay my hands on but
hadn't dared submit a PR. Matt, Alex and Suhas were extraordinarily
generous with their time in teaching us about Bitcoin and how to
contribute.

— John Newbery (@jfnewbery)
https://twitter.com/jfnewbery/status/1064301049534664707?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[November
18, 2018]
____

____
I started making small commits to
https://twitter.com/bitcoincoreorg?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[@bitcoincoreorg]
and was in awe of the engagement on my PRs by
https://twitter.com/MarcoFalke?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[@MarcoFalke]
https://twitter.com/pwuille?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[@pwuille]
https://twitter.com/orionwl?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[@orionwl]
https://twitter.com/LukeDashjr?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[@LukeDashjr] and
https://twitter.com/jfnewbery?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[@jfnewbery] Such a
welcoming project!

— Jeff Rade ƒ´ (@jeffrade)
https://twitter.com/jeffrade/status/1064593787756965893?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[November
19, 2018]
____

One of the most difficult things for people to wrap their mind around
seems to be that the focal point for Bitcoin development is *not* simply
the structure that is defined by the Bitcoin Core GitHub account. While
Bitcoin Core has some structure (it uses centralized communications
channels in order to coordinate), the project itself is not subject to
being controlled by any of its participants — even those who have
escalated privileges on the GitHub repository. While it is _technically_
possible for a maintainer-organized coup to hijack the GitHub
repository, censor dissenting developers, and perhaps even maintain the
brand name of “Bitcoin Core,” the result would be that Bitcoin Core
would stop being the development focal point. Developers who disagreed
with the actions of the maintainers would simply fork the code and shift
their work to a different repository over which the Bitcoin Core
maintainers had no administrative privileges.

Even absent a “coup” per se, if a controversial change did somehow make
it into Core, some developers would fork the software, remove the
controversial change, and make it available for users. You could argue
that this is exactly what happened when Amaury Sechet forked Bitcoin
Core and removed the Segregated Witness functionality to create Bitcoin
ABC. Alternatively, if Core rejects proposed changes that some people
want, developers can fork it and add those changes. This has happened
many times, such as when:

* https://medium.com/u/3748c5d6e52c[Mike Hearn] forked Core to create
Bitcoin XT
* https://medium.com/u/430432e67872[Andrew Stone] forked Core to create
Bitcoin Unlimited
* https://medium.com/u/765aa39f1042[Jeff Garzik] forked Core to create
BTC1

Forking the code is easy. Shifting the focal point of Bitcoin
development is hard — you must convince contributors that their time is
better spent contributing to a different project.

____
I hold allegiance to no man, to no dev team in Bitcoin. My intention is
to run the code that I judge best protects my financial sovereignty.

— Jameson Lopp (@lopp)
https://twitter.com/lopp/status/843210083588816896?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[March
18, 2017]
____

It’s also hard to convince many people that users do not blindly follow
Bitcoin Core’s changes — this may be a self reinforcing belief, because
if users don’t participate in the consensus process by staying aware of
their options, they are ceding some of their power to developers.
However, the power of the users was exercised during the UASF (User
Activated Soft Fork) movement of 2017. An anonymous Bitcoin developer
using the pseudonym https://medium.com/u/4f206fb261c6[shaolinfry]
proposed
https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0148.mediawiki[BIP 148],
which would force miners to activate Segregated Witness functionality at
a block height that would occur near August 1. However, BIP 148 proved
to be too controversial to be adopted by Bitcoin Core, so shaolinfry
forked Core and made “https://github.com/UASF/bitcoin[Bitcoin UASF]”
software available. This software implementation
https://www.buybitcoinworldwide.com/uasf/[gained a nontrivial amount of
traction] and
https://hackernoon.com/bip-148-uasf-first-year-anniversary-a-new-system-of-governance-223907ec298b[seemed
to create sufficient pressure] to convince miners to adopt
https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0091.mediawiki[BIP 91]
to activate the fork before the BIP 148 deadline.

In my opinion the best Bitcoin Core contributors are those who practice
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ljqra3BcqWM[extreme ownership]. Case in
point — while https://medium.com/u/f172f16c0e36[John Newbery] did not
write the code that contained this particular consensus bug, he feels
responsible for not preventing it from being merged via careful review
and for not finding it later while writing test cases.

____
I am responsible for the CVE-2018-17144 bug. https://t.co/BrPVivM296

— John Newbery (@jfnewbery)
https://twitter.com/jfnewbery/status/1044016889117192194?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw[September
24, 2018]
____

We are all Satoshi.

Video: https://youtu.be/DjYbsq3FXfM

==== Contributing to Bitcoin Core

It can feel daunting to start contributing to Core, though there are
plenty of resources available to help aspiring developers. The
guidelines for contributing
https://bitcoincore.org/en/faq/contributing-code/[can be found here]
though you may wish to start off with
https://medium.com/u/4acb12744ff8[Jimmy Song]’s
https://bitcointechtalk.com/a-gentle-introduction-to-bitcoin-core-development-fdc95eaee6b8[Gentle
Introduction to Bitcoin Core Development].

Core developer https://medium.com/u/8fcd91e98202[Eric Lombrozo] also
penned a piece about understanding how changes take place within the
Core repository -
"https://medium.com/@elombrozo/the-bitcoin-core-merge-process-74687a09d81d[The
Bitcoin Core Merge Process]."

https://medium.com/u/17e9935afef1[Alex B.] wrote an excellent article
about the
https://medium.com/@bergealex4/the-tao-of-bitcoin-development-ff093c6155cd[philosophy
behind Bitcoin development] — anyone who wants to become a serious
contributor can save themselves a lot of time by reading this.

Newcomers may also be interested in joining the
https://bitcoin-core-review-club.github.io/[Bitcoin Core PR Review Club]
to see how code reviews are performed.

A specific example may be helpful — while writing this article I
encountered difficulties while trying to run the verify-commits.py
script on my machine in order to audit the integrity of the GitHub
commit history. In order to save future developers from having to deal
with these issues, I
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/14809[opened a pull request to
improve the documentation]. As you can see from the PR history, 4
different developers chimed in with suggestions for how I could improve
my pull request. This ranged from using different wiki markup to a
simplified bash command to a new parameter that could be used in the
verify-commits.py script. I agreed that all of the suggestions made
sense, so I incorporated them into my code and pushed an updated version
for my pull request. At that point, the developers who were
participating in the review acknowledged that they found the PR to be
acceptable, and maintainer https://github.com/MarcoFalke[Marco Falke]
tagged it for inclusion in the 0.18 release. After several more days
went by with no objections from developers, the code was merged into
Core by maintainer Samuel Dobson.

==== Who Controls Bitcoin?

As I’ve
http://www.coindesk.com/nobody-understands-bitcoin-thats-ok/[argued
extensively] over the years, it’s practically impossible to fully
comprehend Bitcoin as a system. The definition (control) of Bitcoin the
protocol is like the definition of a language. Languages emerge
spontaneously; the consensus over the meaning of words is organic rather
than dictated by dictionaries. Much as dictionaries describe the
phenomenon of a language rather than define it, so do Bitcoin
implementations describe the language of Bitcoin with code. No one is
forced to agree with the definition of a given word in a dictionary,
neither are they forced to agree with code in a given Bitcoin
implementation by running it.

Languages are not governed by democracy and neither is Bitcoin; while
you may hear people make references to miners, nodes, developers, or
users “voting” there is no such mechanism that can enable a majority
vote of any kind to coerce a minority of dissenters into accepting
changes with which they disagree. Bitcoin is anarchy — without rulers,
but not without rules. The rules are defined and enforced by individual
participants on the network.

While changes to the Bitcoin protocol itself are usually made via the
https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/README.mediawiki[Bitcoin
Improvement Proposal] process, even this is only a recommended best
practice and no one can be forced to follow it. It is merely a more
formalized way of trying to guide a change through a process of peer
review and consensus building.

As difficult as this is to explain and understand, it is a crucial
aspect to Bitcoin’s antifragility — if there was a single point of
control, it would also be a single point of failure that would be
exploited by powerful entities that are threatened by Bitcoin’s success.
Ultimately, each node operator governs themselves by ensuring that no
one else on the network is breaking the rules to which they agree.
http://www.coindesk.com/bitcoins-security-model-deep-dive/[This security
model] is the foundation for Bitcoin’s bottom-up governance.

Video: https://youtu.be/_IMzSCSeM68

No one controls Bitcoin.

No one controls the focal point for Bitcoin development.
