=== Jameson Lopp - Bitcoin’s Security Model: A Deep Dive

****
* Source: https://blog.lopp.net/bitcoins-security-model-a-deep-dive/
* Author: Jameson Lopp
* Date copied: 2022-03-07
****

When discussing consensus mechanisms for different cryptocurrencies, one
issue that often causes arguments is a lack of understanding of the
security model that they provide for the historical data in the ledger.

When
https://blog.lopp.net/bitcoin-the-trust-anchor-in-a-sea-of-blockchains/[discussing
consensus mechanisms] for different cryptocurrencies, one issue that
often causes arguments is a lack of understanding (and definition) of
the security model that they provide for the historical data in the
ledger. While each consensus model aims to prevent various theoretical
attacks, it’s important to understand the goals for the model.

Every security model has two main parts: assumptions and guarantees. If
the assumptions used as inputs hold true, then so should the guarantees
that are output by the model.

Let’s dig into the security model that appears to be offered to bitcoin
users who run a full node.

==== In search of truth

[quote, Pieter Wuille, https://www.reddit.com/r/BitcoinBeginners/comments/3eq3y7/full_node_question/ctk4lnd/] 
____
One of bitcoin’s strengths – the most important in my opinion even –
is the low degree of trust you need in others.
____

The goal of distributed ledgers is to provide an ordered history of
events, because in distributed systems you can’t simply trust a
timestamp.

When a new participant on a blockchain-based network joins, they
download any available blocks and consider every valid series of blocks
that they see, starting from a hard-coded genesis block.

One of the greatest assumptions made by bitcoin’s security model is that
the majority of miners are honest – that they are working to secure the
blockchain rather than attempting to undermine it. In practice, this has
held true throughout bitcoin’s history due to miner incentives, though
https://freedom-to-tinker.com/2016/10/21/bitcoin-is-unstable-without-the-block-reward/[some
question] if it will continue to hold true in the future.

Given this assumption, full node operators can be completely sure of
several facts:

* Nobody has inflated the monetary supply except for miners, and only
according to a well-defined schedule.
* Nobody ever spent money without having the appropriate private key(s).
* Nobody ever spent the same money twice.

Full node operators can be reasonably sure of several other things.
There is a strong guarantee that:

* Any block in the chain was created within approximately two hours of
the block’s timestamp.
* They are syncing the “true” blockchain history.

At a more technical level, this requires a multitude of checks:

* All blocks follow the consensus rules:
* Each block is
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/main.cpp#L3643[chained
to a parent block]
* Each block met its difficulty target and has
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/pow.cpp#L77[sufficient
proof of work]
* Block timestamps fall in a
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/main.cpp#L3520[window
relative to recent blocks]
* The Merkle root
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/main.cpp#L3385[matches
the block’s transactions]
* No blocks were
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/main.cpp#L3405[larger
than the allowed maximum size]
* Each block’s first (and only first) transaction
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/main.cpp#L3409[is a
coinbase transaction]
* Coinbase outputs don’t pay more than the
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/main.cpp#L2495[appropriate
block reward]
* No blocks contained more than the
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/main.cpp#L3426[allowed
signature operations]
* All transactions follow the consensus rules:
* Input and output values
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/main.cpp#L1070[are
sane]
* Transactions
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/main.cpp#L1250[only
spend unspent outputs]
* All inputs being spent
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/main.cpp#L2026[have
valid signatures]
* No coinbase transaction outputs were spent
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/main.cpp#L1971[within
100 blocks of their creation].
* No transactions
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/main.cpp#L3571[spend
inputs with a locktime] before the block in which they are confirmed.
* https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Protocol_rules[Many other rules] that would
take too long to cover here.

==== Thermodynamic security

Once a transaction is confirmed in a block it can’t be reversed without
someone expending a minimum amount of energy to rewrite the chain.

As long as no attacker holds more than 50% of the network’s
computational power, and honest nodes can communicate quickly, the
probability of a transaction being reversed decreases exponentially with
the number of confirmations it has received. There are other attacks,
https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/selfish-mining-a-25-attack-against-the-bitcoin-network-1383578440[such
as selfish mining], that can reduce this power requirement, though they
appear to be difficult to perpetrate.


.Source: “Bitcoin’s Security Model Revisited” by Yonatan Sompolinsky1 and Aviv Zohar
image::Attack-table-e1478882332551.png[]

Looking at the current cumulative work performed by bitcoin miners, it
would take nearly 10^26^ hashes to build an alternative blockchain from
genesis with greater cumulative proof of work that full nodes would
consider to be the “true” chain.

.Source: http://bitcoin.sipa.be
image::work-ever.png[]

To crunch some numbers on the cost involved in such an attack: +
_An Antminer S9 runs at 0.1 Joule per GH (10^9^ hashes)_ +
_10^26^ hashes * 0.1 J / 10^9^ hashes = 10^15^ joules_ +
_10^15^ joules = 2,777,777,778 kw hours * $0.10 kw/hour = $277,777,778
worth of electricity to rewrite the entire blockchain_

Whereas at time of writing a single block must hit a difficulty target
of 253,618,246,641 which would require approximately: +
_253,618,246,641 * 2^48^ / 65535 = 1.09 * 10^21^ hashes_ +
_1.09 * 10^21^ hashes * 0.1 J / 10^9^ hashes = 1.09 * 10^11^ joules_ +
_1.09 * 10^11^ joules = 30,278 kw hours * $0.10 kw/hour = $3,028 worth
of electricity per block_

This is why we can state that bitcoin is provably thermodynamically
secure.

There are a few variables that you can tweak in the above calculation to
decrease the cost, but we can be sure that it will require many millions
of dollars worth of electricity alone in order to rewrite the entire
blockchain. However, an attacker with this much hash power would at
worst be able to reverse transactions back to 2014 – we’ll delve into
the reason for this shortly.

Also note that this doesn’t take into account the costs required to
obtain and operate sufficient mining equipment to carry out such an
attack.

==== Sybil resistance

Because the bitcoin protocol considers the true chain to be the one with
the most cumulative proof of work (not the longest chain as is often
incorrectly stated,) the result is that a new peer joining the network
only needs to connect to a single honest peer in order to find the true
chain.

This is also known as “Sybil resistance,” which means that it’s not
possible for someone to launch an attack against a node by creating many
dishonest peers that feed it false information.

image::Nodes.png[]

Pictured here is a near worst-case scenario in which your node is being
massively Sybil attacked but still has a single connection with an
honest node that is connected to the true bitcoin network. As long as a
single honest peer is passing the true blockchain data to your full
node, it will be quite clear that any Sybil attackers are attempting to
deceive you and your node will ignore them.

==== Real-time consensus

The bitcoin protocol creates a number of other interesting attributes
with regard to maintaining network-wide consensus once your node is at
the tip of the blockchain.

The authors of “_https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/261.pdf[Research
Perspectives and Challenges for Bitcoin and Cryptocurrencies]_” note the
following properties that are important to the stability of a
cryptocurrency:

*Eventual consensus*. At any time, all compliant nodes agree upon a
prefix of what will become the eventual “true” blockchain.

*Exponential convergence*. The probability of a fork of depth n is
O(2−n). This gives users high confidence that a simple “k confirmations”
rule will ensure their transactions are settled permanently.

*Liveness*. New blocks will continue to be added and valid transactions
with appropriate fees will be included in the blockchain within a
reasonable amount of time.

*Correctness*. All blocks in the chain with the most cumulative proof of
work will only include valid transactions.

*Fairness*. A miner with X% of the network’s total computational power
will mine approximately X% of blocks.

The authors of the paper note that bitcoin appears to have these
properties, at least under the assumption that the majority of miners
are remaining honest, which is what the block rewards along with proof
of work attempt to incentivize.

There are many other algorithms that can be used to maintain consensus
in distributed systems such as:

* Proof of Stake
* Proof of Coin Age
* Proof of Deposit
* Proof of Burn
* Proof of Activity
* Proof of Elapsed Time
* Federated Consensus
* Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance

These create different security models – the most obvious difference
from proof of work being that each of the alternative systems’ consensus
is driven at the expense of internal resources (coins or reputation)
rather than external resources (electricity.) This creates a very
different set of incentives for (and trust in) validators on the network
which drastically changes the security model.

==== Security model misunderstandings

A common mistaken assumption is that there is a well-defined security
model for bitcoin.

In reality, the bitcoin protocol was and is being built without a
formally defined specification or security model. The best that we can
do is to study the incentives and behavior of actors within the system
in order to better understand and attempt to describe it.

That said, there are a few properties of the bitcoin protocol that are
often analyzed incorrectly.

Some blockchains have suffered badly enough from attacks that developers
add
https://github.com/ppcoin/ppcoin/blob/0.4.2/src/checkpoints.cpp#L369[centrally
broadcasted signed checkpoints] into the node software, essentially
saying that “block X has been validated by the developers as being on
the correct historical chain.” This is a point of extreme
centralization.

It’s worth noting that bitcoin has
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/chainparams.cpp#L138[13
hard-coded checkpoints], but they do not change the security model in
the way that broadcasted checkpoints do. The last checkpoint was added
to https://bitcoin.org/en/release/v0.9.3[Bitcoin Core 0.9.3] and is at
block 295000, which was created on April 9, 2014. This block had a
difficulty of 6,119,726,089 which would require approximately:

_6,119,726,089 * 2^48^ / 65535 = 2.62 * 10^19^ hashes_ +
_2.62 * 10^19^ hashes * 0.1 J / 10^9^ hashes = 2.62 * 10^9^ joules_ +
_2.62 * 10^9^ joules = 728 kw hours * $0.10 kw/hour = $73 worth of
electricity to generate_

Thus, if a Sybil attacker completely surrounded a new node that was
syncing from scratch, it could create some short blockchains at low
heights at almost no cost, but only up to the various checkpointed
blocks.

If it partitioned a node off the network that had synced past block
295,000 it would be able to start feeding false blocks at the cost of
$73 per block, at least until it hit a difficulty readjustment. However,
the further along the victim node had synced, the greater the cost would
be for the attacker to create a chain with more cumulative work.

Both
https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=194078.msg3009608#msg3009608[Greg
Maxwell] and
https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/1797/what-are-checkpoints/1798#comment36402_1798[Pieter
Wuille] have stated that they hope to someday completely remove
checkpoints. Bitcoin Core lead maintainer Wladimir van der Laan noted
that checkpoints are a
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/7591#issuecomment-254448921[constant
source of confusion] to people who seek to understand bitcoin’s security
model.

An argument could be made that this means a full node is “trusting” the
Core devs regarding the validity of the blockchain history up until 9th
April, 2014, but the node still checks the Merkle hashes in each block’s
header, meaning that the soundness of the transaction history is still
secured by proof of work. These old checkpoints
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/main.cpp#L1996[enable a
performance increase] (skipping signature verification) when initially
syncing the historical blockchain, though the introduction of
libsecp256k1 has made the
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/7591#issuecomment-188369540[performance
difference less significant].

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/5927[Checkpoints remain] in
place for three purposes:

. To prevent nodes from
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/5562#issuecomment-68637511[having
their memory filled up] with valid but low proof-of-work block headers
. Skipping signatures in earlier blocks (performance improvement)
. To estimate syncing progress

While this article was being written Greg Maxwell
https://bitcoincore.org/en/meetings/2016/10/27/[proposed replacing
checkpoints] with a
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/9053/files#diff-64cbe1ad5465e13bc59ee8bb6f3de2e7R100[cumulative
work check] instead. Once a node has a chain that contains more than 5.4
* 10^24^ hashes performed, chains with less cumulative work would be
rejected. This coincides with the amount of work performed up to
approximately block 320,000 in September 2014, at which point individual
blocks were of difficulty ~27,000,000,000.

.Source: https://blockchain.info/charts/difficulty?timespan=3years[Blockchain.info]
image::Difficulty.png[]

_Mining blocks at a difficulty of 27,000,000,000 would require
approximately_ +
_27,000,000,000 * 2^48^ / 65535 = 1.16 * 10^20^ hashes_ +
_1.16 * 10^20^ hashes * 0.1 J / 10^9^ hashes = 1.16 * 10^10^ joules_ +
_1.16 * 10^10^ joules = 3,222 kw hours * $0.10 kw/hour = $322 worth of
electricity per block_

Thus, with this proposed change, if a Sybil attacker completely
surrounded a new node that was syncing from scratch, it would be able to
start feeding false blocks starting at any block after genesis for
basically no cost. If a Sybil attacker completely surrounded a node that
synced past block ~320,000 it could start feeding a false chain from
that point at the cost of $322 per block.

In short, either check for securing a node’s initial sync is relatively
inexpensive to attack if an entity can gain complete control of your
node’s Internet connection; if they can’t, then the node will easily
dismiss the attacker’s blocks.

On a related note, every blockchain system has its
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/chainparams.cpp#L51[genesis
block hard coded] into the node software. You could argue that there is
a social contract to the “shared history” that is the ledger – once a
block is old enough, there is an understanding amongst everyone on the
network that it will never be reverted. As such, when developers take a
very old block and create a checkpoint out of it, it is done more so as
an agreed-upon sanity check rather than as a dictation of history.

In addition to checkpoints, there’s also the matter of how a node
bootstraps itself. The current process for bitcoin nodes is to check to
see if it has a local database of peers it has previously learned about.
If not, then it will query a set of “DNS Seeds” that are
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/chainparams.cpp#L117[hard-coded
into the software]. These seeds maintain a list of well connected
bitcoin nodes that they return to your node.

As we can see from the code, Bitcoin Core 0.13 currently uses DNS Seeds
run by Pieter Wuille, Matt Corallo, Luke Dashjr, Christian Decker, Jeff
Garzik, and Jonas Schnelli. Anyone can run a DNS seed by using Pieter
Wuille’s https://github.com/sipa/bitcoin-seeder[bitcoin-seeder software]
or https://github.com/TheBlueMatt/dnsseed-bitcoinj[Matt Corallo’s
software], though in order for it to be used by new nodes you’d have to
convince the developers of one of the full node implementations to add
your DNS seed host to their software.

It may once again seem like a point of extreme centralization that the
bootstrapping process for a new node is reliant upon a mere six DNS
seeds. Recall that bitcoin’s security model only requires that you
connect to a single honest peer in order to be able to withstand Sybil
attacks.

As such, a new node only needs to be able to connect to a single DNS
seed that isn’t compromised and returns IP addresses of honest nodes.
However, there is a fallback if for some reason all of the DNS seeds are
unreachable – a
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.13/src/chainparamsseeds.h#L10[hard-coded
list] of reliable node IP addresses that
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/0.13/contrib/seeds[gets updated]
for each release.

The security model for these various initialization parameters is not
that the full node operator is trusting X DNS seeds or Y Core developers
to feed them honest data, but rather that at least 1 / X DNS seeds is
not compromised or 1 / Y Core developers is honest about
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/7415[reviewing the validity of
hard-coded peer changes].

==== Nothing is perfectly secure

At an even deeper level, when you run a full node, you are probably
trusting the hardware and software you are running to a certain extent.

There are methods to verify the software by
https://www.reddit.com/r/Bitcoin/wiki/verifying_bitcoin_core[checking
the signatures of your binary] against those of van der Laan, but it’s
unlikely that many people bother to go through this process. As for
trustworthy hardware, that’s a tough problem. The closest you’ll
probably come to a secure hardware solution is something like
https://www.crowdsupply.com/design-shift/orwl[ORWL], which guaranteed to
“self destruct” if anyone attempts to tamper with it.

image::ORWL-Machines.png[]

However, given that hardware architectures for CPUs, RAM and other
important hardware tend to be proprietary, you can never be 100% sure
that they aren’t compromised.

==== Bitcoin’s balance of power

The waters become even murkier when you begin to investigate the
relationship between different participants in the system.

The purpose of running a full node is to protect your financial
sovereignty. This generally means that by installing and running a
specific version of software, you are entering into an agreement that
you will abide by the rules of that software and that everyone else
using the network must also abide by them.

As such, if people want to change the rules in such a way that are not
backwards compatible, you must explicitly agree to the rule change by
running a new version of the software. On the other hand, backwards
compatible rule changes can be implemented and enforced without your
consent.

A highly simplified description of the power dynamics in bitcoin:

image::lopptweet.png[]

It’s important to note that full node software does not automatically
update itself, and this is by design. Automatic updates would greatly
shift the balance of power to developers, enabling them to force rule
changes upon nodes and miners without their permission.

Unfortunately, while a rule change may be technically backwards
compatible, we have come to learn over the years that sufficiently
creative soft forks can actually implement changes that are clearly
outside the intent of the previous version of rules. Vitalik Buterin
https://www.reddit.com/r/btc/comments/428tjl/softforking_the_block_time_to_2_min_my_primarily/[demonstrated
this] with a description of a way to soft fork bitcoin’s block time from
10 minutes to 2 minutes, which would of course also speed up the
emission schedule of new bitcoins.

There is one trump card that full nodes have in order to fight back
against unwanted soft forks is to hard fork away from the miners who
implemented the soft fork. This is difficult to perform (by design) and
raises a lot of questions about measuring consensus and finding the
economically important nodes.

Technically, it could be done by changing the miner algorithm from
double SHA256 to a different hash function, thereby rendering all SHA256
ASICs useless for mining bitcoins. It’s for this reason that node
operators should remain vigilant to changes in the ecosystem and remind
miners that they can be replaced if they exceed their authority.

A lot of game theory is involved in discussing miner operations and
their threat to bitcoin’s security, and I speculated as to how the
mining ecosystem may change
https://medium.com/@lopp/the-future-of-bitcoin-mining-ac9c3dc39c60[in a
previous article]. While bitcoin mining is more centralized than most of
us would like, it still seems to work well because bitcoin miners have a
lot of capital invested – they can’t risk destroying their investment by
acting maliciously in a system where everyone is watching.

==== SPV security

A lot of bitcoin users employ a lightweight client to access the network
rather than a full node since it requires far fewer resources while
still providing strong security.

A client employing Simplified Payment Verification (SPV) downloads a
complete copy of the headers for all blocks in the entire chain. This
means that the download and storage requirements scale linearly with the
amount of time since bitcoin was invented. This is described in section
8 of the http://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf[bitcoin whitepaper].

image::pow-chain.png[]

Satoshi wrote that an SPV client “can’t check the transaction for
himself, but by linking it to a place in the chain, he can see that a
network node has accepted it, and blocks added after it further confirm
the network has accepted it.” SPV assumes that a transaction X blocks
deep will be costly to forge.

SPV seems to offer similar guarantees as full node security, but with an
additional assumption that any block with a valid header and proof of
work always contains valid transactions. Because SPV clients don’t check
all of the consensus rules noted in the first section of this article,
they are making the assumption that the consensus rules are being
checked by the node(s) from which they request transactions.

An additional, minor security difference involves peers withholding
information from you. When you’re running a full node, peers can
withhold unconfirmed transactions and blocks from you. However, once you
receive a block from any peer, it’s not possible for anyone to withhold
the transactions in that block from you. On the flip side, it is
possible for a peer to give a block header to an SPV client and then
withhold information about transactions in that block.

SPV clients can make a query to learn information about transactions
affecting a certain address and while it would be costly for peers to
lie to them about the existence of fake confirmed transactions (would
require mining a block with sufficient PoW) they could lie by omission
claim that there were no results for the bloom filter you used to query
for transactions. It’s also worth noting that SPV is terribly
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HScK4pkDNds[broken from a privacy
standpoint] due to flaws with bloom filters.

BitcoinJ has an https://bitcoinj.github.io/security-model[excellent
write-up] of the SPV security model. Regarding unconfirmed transactions,
they note:

[quote]
____
In SPV mode, the only reason you have to believe the transaction is
valid is the fact that the nodes you connected to relayed the
transaction. If an attacker could ensure you were connected to his
nodes, this would mean they could feed you a transaction that was
completely invalid (spent non-existing money), and it would still be
accepted as if it was valid.
____

SPV security is probably “good enough” for the average user, though it
could be improved upon with SPV Fraud Proofs. There has been
http://coinjournal.net/how-fraud-proofs-may-improve-spv-node-security-in-bitcoin/[some
discussion] of
https://diyhpl.us/wiki/transcripts/mit-bitcoin-expo-2016/fraud-proofs-petertodd/[this
concept] but no implemented
https://gist.github.com/justusranvier/451616fa4697b5f25f60[proposals]
for building them into the protocol.

==== There’s no place like 127.0.0.1

If you aren’t running a full node (and actually using it to validate
transactions) then you’re outsourcing at least some level of trust to
third parties, resulting in a different security model for your usage of
bitcoin. Note that this need not necessitate that all users and
businesses build their software directly on top of Bitcoin Core’s RPC
API.

Some alternate infrastructure configurations might include but are not
limited to:

{empty}1) Using a mobile wallet such as
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=de.schildbach.wallet[Bitcoin
Wallet for Android], https://greenaddress.it/[GreenAddress], or
https://stashnode.com/#wallet[Stash] that enables you to configure the
wallet to only query your own full node.

image::BTC-security-graphic.png[]

{empty}2) Building apps on top of SPV node libraries such as BitcoinJ
and configuring them to only connect to full nodes that you operate. In
BitcoinJ this can be accomplished by defining your own
https://github.com/bitcoinj/bitcoinj/blob/a7cad0ede447d4bcba7dd55639df442a408df6fb/core/src/main/java/org/bitcoinj/net/discovery/SeedPeers.java[SeedPeers]
that you pass to your
https://github.com/bitcoinj/bitcoinj/blob/release-0.14/core/src/main/java/org/bitcoinj/core/PeerGroup.java[PeerGroup]
during initialization. With libbitcoin you can define a network
connection to a specific node
https://github.com/libbitcoin/libbitcoin/blob/b1722139f9e701ceedbb88a0d90cd786bdda2408/doc/sphinx/examples/connect.rst[using
this example].

{empty}3) Building a proxy server that is compatible with Bitcoin Core’s
JSON-RPC API that sends some calls to third party services but also
automatically verifies the data they return by making calls to a local
full node. For an example, see https://github.com/BitGo/bitgod[BitGo’s
BitGoD software]. This hybrid model can give you the best of both
worlds: you can leverage advanced features offered by third parties
while still retaining your financial sovereignty.

==== Full nodes for freedom

It’s clear that running your own full node offers superior security with
the fewest required assumptions. Given that you can build a computer
capable of running a reliable full node for only a few hundred dollars,
do the math and determine if securing your financial sovereignty is
worth the price.

_Thanks to Kristov Atlas, Eric Martindale, Andrew Miller, and Kiara
Robles for reviewing and providing feedback for this article._
